Okay, the tape is rolling. In Ménage Autre... Ménage Autre. Ménage Autre, sorry
about that. Okay, I'll say it. In Ménage Autre, Jason Ward, the hero, attends an
autograph session, and he didn't seem to have very much fun there. Did this
arise out of real-life experiences, or are most of them a little more fun than
that? Oh, I love autograph sessions. I love it. But it's easy to take it and,
you know, if you were tired or you wanted to be somewhere else, I've never had
the experience of having an endless group of people coming up and demanding my
autograph, you know. I go to autograph sessions that I've been to. We figure if
eight or 12 people come, everybody's very delighted.
it.
I know that some mainstream authors I have read about get very unhappy at
autograph sessions. They get tired. When you read about the American Booksellers
Association Convention, usually they say that the science fiction authors were
among the most agreeable there who just kept signing autographs and signing
autographs and other people got really upset and cranky and so forth and so on.
So it's easy to make up. And we've all had experiences when we were doing
something that we wish we were some slight self. So it's easy to take the
situation and invent it. Whereas as we're sitting there and signing good luck
and best of wishes, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera, and asking them, how do you
spell your name? That I've been through. I've learned that you always ask the
person how to spell their name because sometimes they spell it in very different
ways. And I've met authors who could think of very witty, very original things
to write in every book, but I'd freeze up. I'm glad to sign my name, but I can't
be creative there on the spur of the moment, so I usually end up saying good
luck, best wishes, best ever, and do that repeatedly. So that part was
realistic. Why are science fiction authors so accessible to the fans, Whereas,
as you mentioned, in other genres, they're not. I have no idea.
I don't know. I don't know if it's science fiction people are writing because
they love it. I would think that most writers write because they love it. But I
just really don't know. Maybe it's because more than science fiction people have
a chance to know their fans on a first-name basis. They meet them at
conventions. They get in the habit of socializing with the people that are
reading their books. And other big-name authors maybe don't have that
opportunity. I just really don't know.
I'd like to ask you a couple of questions now, just on the general nature of
science fiction. Are those who now claim that there's a glut of fantasy which is
appearing and that this glut of fantasy is appearing to the detriment of science
fiction. Do you have any observations on this pro or con? There's a lot of
fantasy, I agree. I don't know that it's to the detriment of science fiction. I
think there's certainly room for both. I think both fulfill needs of people. I
keep telling mundane kind of people, mainstream kind of people, who ask about,
what do I purpose, or what good is science fiction? And I keep saying, well,
people have always wanted myths. They have always wanted wonderful creatures.
They sit around the campfire and they would fantasize about the creatures that
lived in the next country. Well, this whole planet, we know what's in the next
country on this planet. The monsters are in outer space, or the myths can be in
outer space. They're also in inner space. It's the same reason that I think the
vampires and horror stories have come up because that's where people can go to
for myths now. I don't know what it is in people that want these wonderful
monsters, but they will have them. They don't care if the world is settled. Why,
if they'll go back to the old-fashioned ones that sneak around, the things that
might exist, people that want to reach out can reach out for strange and
wonderful creatures beyond space and the ones that don't want to reach out can
reach for the creatures in inner space I think it also has to do with a lot of
the time um the space that things are very complex they're very frightening
there are no clear cut rights and wrongs and there's really no answers to lots
of problems. One answer, what answers one problem, raises a whole lot more
problems. Everything's so interlinked. You raise employment and you do this and
that, and some of that's detrimental and so forth. And I think fantasy is, I
don't want to say it's an escape. I don't want to put it down. I don't read
fantasy because maybe it's because I like to reach out. Maybe it's because I'm a
little more optimistic. I believe there will be a tomorrow. But I think people
read fantasy because they can get away from all the grays. Fantasy provides
worlds where there are clear rights and clear wrongs where you can end their
problems with a strong right arm and a magic sword and a pure heart. And I think
that the heroic fantasy then gives people something to get away from, to get
away from this world, like a lot of these movies that they were producing during
the Depression and a lot of the books that they were writing during the
Depression, adventure stories, so the people could get away from the terrible
things that they had to face every day. And I think that's why there's a lot of
fantasy. And I think there's a need for it. And I think it's wonderful that it's
there for the people who want it. And there's probably a lot of bad fantasy
written and a lot of junk fantasy. But heaven, you go on the mainstream shelves
and there's certainly a lot of junk there. And I think that the work that is
well written and the work that is good will probably manage to sustain itself
even as the junk comes and goes and passes away.
My engineer wants me to ask a question. Hang on a second. What question? Ask her
if she thinks that might have some sort of tie-in with the boom and the fantasy
role play again. Okay. Okay. Do you think this has some sort of tie-in with the
boom in the fantasy role-playing games? I think that they're both part and
parcel of the same thing. People who can play roles in fantasy games are being
more actively involved in the fantasy than just sitting there and reading it.
They're living it, in a sense. and again it's a way to to be faced with problems
that have clear solutions and rights and wrongs to them I think probably the
upsurge and the fantasy that people were reading came before the roleplaying but
I think it's all part of the same thing in a way it discourages I can't say it's
really discouraging But I think it reflects a certain pessimism, perhaps, about
the future.
Perhaps, as I said, perhaps that's why I still like science fiction, why that's
what I write and that's what I read, because I retain a certain optimism that
somehow, maybe not grandly or gloriously, people will survive. I think we will
perhaps even prevail, will at least will limp along into the next century, and
the century after that, and the century after that. That's kind of what happens
in my books. You may have noticed that there are a lot of large social problems
that exist within each book that never get solved, but people in the book solve
their own problems. They handle their own lives. And I think maybe that a little
bit of personal philosophy of mine come through that I can't solve the world's
problems, but I can certainly keep control of my own life. And my belief in that
I can pass on.
Which authors, writing now, do you enjoy, just out of curiosity? Oh, a lot of
them. I read a lot. Always between books. I sit down and read 40 or 50 of the
stretch because they pile up on my shelf. I like Joseph Wombaum. I have enjoyed
Lewis Thomas, who did Medusa and the Snail and Lies to Sell. I enjoy Isaac
Asimov. I enjoy Anne McCaffrey and a lot of Larry Niven and C.J. Cherryh, not
all of Fred Saberhagen, but certainly a lot of his work, Just glancing at some
of H.B. Piper Tanith Lee She writes fantasy And I do read some of hers
I've discovered a writer Who's now dead, unfortunately Van Gulick Who wrote a
bunch of mysteries About a 7th century Chinese Magistrate, Judge D And I've
started collecting his books Chelsea Quinn Yarborough I enjoy there are a lot of
books a lot of authors I like I'm rather Catholic in my reading tastes I read a
lot of non-fiction as well as fiction science books, sociology books
This is just a trivia fact it's not anything to the interview you mentioned
Lewis Thomas I have a friend who lives in Connecticut who's working on an MBA
and in one of his business ethics courses they had to read both the Lewis Thomas
books which you wouldn't expect in a business course. It's a little unexpected,
yeah. But it's encouraging. The other great question I wanted to ask you, there
are those that are bothered by a seemingly recent trend in that everybody is
writing prequels and sequels. In fact, the Hugo Awards, all the novels nominated
were either prequels or sequels. Some people are bothered by this, other people
don't care. Do you have any feelings on this? Well, I started out thinking that
I was going to write each one different,
and I may still end up doing a lot of that, you know, creating, rebuilding the
world anew each time I write a book. It's certainly easy if you already have the
background there, and in a sense, it's no worse than mainstream writers who are
writing all out of the same world, aren't they, and yet they get infinite
stories out of the one particular world. I think the readers, what's
the word? They like continuity.
Mystery writers, mystery readers, have liked reading the same characters forever
and ever. I mean, how many continual mystery characters are there? There are
detectives. Mystery is replete with series characters. And why do you think
people watch series television? Because they like to see these same characters
over and over and over again. They get hooked on a character. I suppose it can
be a little discouraging to think, well, gee, they're not after any new ideas.
They're just after these one characters, who if they're in a series, they can't
really change because you have to keep them the same or they're not the same
characters anymore. Oh, dear. We're getting a buzz. You hear a buzz? Yeah. Okay,
we don't hear it over here, so apparently it's not getting on the tape. Oh,
okay. Okay, go ahead. Continue if you want.
and it's all about it can be financially rewarding to have a series because
people like a particular character then you know you've got an audience every
time you write a book about that particular character it'd
be
nice if each of the award-winning books was something that stood on itself
instead of being parts in a series. And maybe award-winning books should be. But
certainly, the things that are voted by the fans, like the Hugos, are the things
that they want to read.
And while I think a writer should necessarily pander to public taste, if he
wants to make a living, you've certainly got to write something that people want
to read. And if he has engaging characters and people like them, why not write
about them? I've got people hounding me to write more Mama Maxwell and Jana
Brill, and I have no objections to doing that. They're a good pair of characters
to make a series, because they don't have to change from book to book. On the
other hand, the book I'm writing now carries within it the seats for a sequel,
but it wouldn't have the same characters in it. It would simply be more of the
story further on down the line. I can't really blame readers for liking series
books. If they liked this particular book why they want more of the same. And I
can't blame writers who want to make a living for giving them more of the same.
And I can't blame readers for buying it and reading it.
I don't know that it's any kind of a degeneration in literature. Those books may
last. They may not.
I think a writer is an entertainer. A writer is an entertainer. And if he thinks
that he's creating deathless prose with every line he struggles to put down, And
if he's writing for history, then he's probably got pretension of brand dexter.
If I write a book that people buy and read by buying, they give me my money,
which I need, and if they enjoy it by reading it, then I'm really happy. I don't
think I would write a book just for money, but certainly I want to write
something that is fun for me to write and I want to write something that is fun
for readers to read.
Okay, David, you have a question. Now the engineer wants to ask you a question
himself. Okay. Can you hear me all right? Yes. Okay, my question is about
writing and writing technique. When you start writing a story, do you develop
your characters first or the storyline first? Which comes first and which
follows, and how does it progress into the full-blown story? It's sometimes one
way and sometimes the other. Sometimes I have a character. I'm trying to think
of one in which I had a character first.
I know I have, but I have had others where there was the story idea, and then I
searched in that idea for the character who was most affected so that I could
have that character at the center. Sometimes I make mistakes. I was six chapters
into the book I'm writing right now before I realized that one of the characters
I had as protagonist didn't know a whole lot of things, that it would increase
tension if the audience knew. Therefore, I went back. I had a character who just
sort of wanted on the page. He was going to be a bit character. But I was
interested in him, and I thought I'm going to do a book about him eventually.
Then it occurred to me that he knew the kind of things that would be interesting
for the readers to know, so I went back and made him the other protagonist for
the book. But other times, I've had a character that I was interested in. Oh,
yeah, House Divided, the woman who was a split personality. I had her first and
had worked out her character, and then I found a situation to put her in. So
sometimes it works one way and sometimes it works the other. Sometimes I have a
setting, and I have a beautiful setting, then I have to figure out a story and
characters to go with it. And I think stories start all kinds of ways.
Okay. That's my list of questions. Okay. Let's see. It's almost an hour and 15
minutes, my goodness. Okay, I'll become a fan again. And yeah, I love the Mama
Maxwell and Jana Brill stories, and I would hope to see them again.
The reason I wanted to talk to you, I just kind of accidentally stumbled on you
when the first novel came out. And bang, bang, bang, here came four novels, and
they've all been very good and very enjoyable, and so that's the reason I wanted
to talk to you. Plus you seemed very accessible at the con. so we appreciate
getting to talk to you. I hope, I'm glad you liked it. That's why I'd say
writer's entertainer and if people don't enjoy reading my stuff that I fail
somewhere along the line no matter how artistic the book might be. I'm
definitely going to do more with Molly Maxwell and Jana Brill. I was going to do
them next but I had this sequel idea for this other book and I think maybe it'll
be next. Let's see. I had something... Your statement about writers being
entertainers, I have a feeling that's going to be one of the shows. That's too
good to pass up. That when you were getting to the end of that, that was, I
think, quite revelatory. And I agree, I just never had thought of it that way.
Just like baseball players? Sure. Football players? Sure. You'll have to go on
strike so you can become a free agent or whatever. Absolutely. Unfortunately,
the publishers have the best because there are a lot of people who want to be
writers. And so the competition is fierce. Yeah, I would think so. It would be
nice if, as an entertainer, I could pull down the same kind of salary that a
football entertainer pulls down, for instance. You know, it's one of these days,
maybe I'll get a bestseller. That's what I'm working for. You have to know
what's important in life. And obviously, football is... It's even more important
than the president the United States now. I wouldn't be the president of the
United States. It's a no-win situation. Uh, that's for sure. David, any more
questions? No, tell her this will probably be edited within two months and we'll
be sending her copy tapes of the air program. Okay, fine. We'll send you a copy
of the interview and then we'll also edit it within the end. No, no. No, we'll
send her a copy tape of the program. Well, yeah. I was going to get to that. And
then we will send you copies of the edited programs for your enjoyment. I love
hearing them. Okay. Sure appreciate your talking to us. We enjoyed it. And keep
on writing. We're out here and we read it and would like to see some more. Well,
I've got about six more chapters of this book to go, which I've got to get done
by the 1st of March. It is. You have it in by the 1st of April. You'll find out
what happened to those columns. I would like to know. is this, are you going to,
are most of your books going to appear paperback-first, or hardback-first
editions on down the line for writers? I've never really understood how that
works. It's a lot easier to get published in paperback because, let's face it,
hardback is expensive, and people are much more likely to put out $2.25 or $2.50
for something that looks interesting and that they might like. I think they're
going to have to be sure they're going to want it before they're going to put
out $10 or $12 for it.
The mass-market media is a paperback and it's much easier for it to get
published in paperback and it's certainly easier to get your name spread around
that way. I think later perhaps, my agent is trying for some hardback edition
and I would love to have stuff picked up by the Science Fiction Book Club. but
it hasn't happened yet I have some story ideas and proposals into my agent that
she's trying for hardback she has a vampire novel of mine that she's trying for
hardback but I have a feeling that when it comes out it'll probably come out in
paperback is it a vampire mystery novel? it's a vampire cop mystery novel a
vampire police procedure novel okay because one of the vampires in it is a cop
mmhmm and he's he's another unusual he's about and he's blonde and gray-eyed and
he's Irish-American. He's a little different than your normal vampire. You've
got the corner on the market on
police procedure novels and they are enjoyable so you might as well throw in at
everything. Engineer has another question yes. What sort of mythos are you using
on the vampires can you go out into daylight? Okay. Which of the vampire
mythoses, whatever the plural is, are you using? Can he go out in the day? Oh,
yes. I picked up most of the things straight out of Dracula. I went ahead and
used that. Except, he goes out in the daytime, but he feels miserable. He hates
it. He can subsist on any blood as long as it's blood. Crosses don't bother him
because he wasn't particularly religious growing up. but he quits breathing in
the presence of garlic. It's like all the air in his lungs turn to concrete. He
can't go in where he isn't invited, which he finds a distinct handicap in the
police officer.
He can go through walls. Now, I might have to rewrite that. There was one point
at which he goes through a solid wall. Every place else he went through, like
doors and so forth, which he could have gone. and he didn't really know how he
went through. He just knew he did. He didn't examine the procedure too closely
because he didn't like being a vampire and didn't really wanna get to know the
whole thing too well.
Let's see what are some of the other things. Disproportionate strength?
Disproportionate strength, is that what you said? Oh, it's quite strong.
Superhuman strength nothing. Very disproportionate strength, very strong sense
of smell and very strong hearing. And I wrote the book to be as realistic as
possible. Of course, the reader knows right away, practically, that there's a
vampire involved before our cop gets bit and becomes a vampire. But he doesn't
even catch on that she's a vampire when she's biting him. He thinks she's really
weird. Because I try to think, what would a normal, everyday person think? A
person's glommed onto their throne that way. You know, and even when he's in the
hospital and he's miserable in the daylight and he feels much better at night
and he's throwing up food and his front teeth are coming loose and things like
that, he has to sit there and watch the Friday Night movies and watch Dracula on
the movie before he starts to catch on what's going on, you know?
Did you, you mentioned Saberhagen. Did you read his, or enjoy his Dracula novel?
Very much. I have all Chelsea Quinn Yarborough's, too, but I haven't managed to
read them yet. They're sitting on the shelf waiting. I understand they're quite
good. I haven't read them yet, either. I have, I guess she's bringing out a
fifth. I have four of them, and they're fifth in the series, which is a modern
-day one, I guess. But I've enjoyed the Fred Saberhagen books very, very much.
And there's a couple of other vampire ones that have been, oh, let's see,
Tanith Lee had one that wasn't very enjoyable. Sabella? Was that Sabella? Yeah.
Yeah. Mm-hmm. And there were a couple of others I read that weren't all that
terrific. But, yeah, I find vampires very fascinating. I've also got the Vampire
Tapestry, which is on my reading shelf, too. If the cop can carry warrants
through the wall, I guess that would be quite a plus for him. If he can carry...
Carry once. Oh.
I don't know if he could do that or not. Presumably his clothes would go with
him, but I don't know about papers. See his, I don't think I ever had him
carrying a solid object through. At the point to which he was going through and
carrying solid objects, it was like a mesh gate or something. That was when he
was carrying a thermos bottle so he could fill it up with blood and take it home
until he'd have a couple of days' supply and wouldn't have to hunt all the time.
If that doesn't make Hardback, will that be a Del Rey book and come out in a
science fiction package? no, unfortunately it won't be a Del Rey because I was
under contract to write that book and once it was turned in, they turned it down
because Judy-Lynn really isn't a fantasy editor and I don't know why she wanted
why she thought she wanted the book she was explaining why she turned it down
and it sounded to me like her image of a vampire is the Hollywood image, where
they have to sleep underground in a coffin at night, and can't go out in the
daylight at all.
It sounded like she hadn't read any of the recent vampire books, and she
probably didn't sound like she'd read Dracula either, because Dracula went out
in the daylight. In fact, the more blood he drank, the better he felt. He was
out there running around in the daylight perfectly well, and he just couldn't
change shape and things like that in the daylight. Oh, my guy's not a shape
-changer breather, and he does reflect in a mirror.
That makes it hard to shave if he can, according to the engineer. That's true,
yeah. Somebody teased him once. What was it? Oh, he was saying he was allergic
to garlic. Somebody says, oh, how long have you been a vampire? At which point
he started to freak out, and then he realized that they were just teasing him.
They asked him something about shaving, and he said, well, the electric razor
was a great boon to vampires.
Okay. The engineer uses an electric razor, so he appreciates that, he says. It's
been very nice talking to you. Thanks again. And we look forward to seeing
what's coming out, and you'll hear from us with a little package of tapes one of
these days. Okay, you bet. Bye-bye now.